Hi and welcome to this video where we're going to talk about multi-line statements and multiline strings.
So a Python program is nothing more than basically a text file.
Write a text document that contains physical lines of code and you write your code over multiple lines
you use the Enter key on your keyboard to move to a new line.
Right.
So that's we'd call that a physical new line.
Now that our code is then passed by the python compilers and it then combines certain lines and makes
up logical lines of code and your logical lines of code are
then tokenized, so that the Python compiler and the interpreter can, you know, basically interpret what
your code is trying to do and actually execute that on the computer.
So - physical lines of code will end on a physical newline character; and logical lines of code, once they've
been tokenized and passed and so on, will end on a newline token.
So how that gets done and so on isn't really important, but what's important is that we have to realize
that there's a difference between a physical newline character and a logical newline token. They're
not necessarily the same thing.
Very often they are, but not always.
So sometimes, physical new lines are ignored, and they're ignored in order to combine multiple physical
lines into a single logical line of code ,which is then terminated by the logical newline token.
And that's what allows us to write code you know over multiple lines that technically should be written
as a single line.
Right.
We can actually write it over multiple lines.
And why would we do that?
It's really for readability, right.
It allows us to make our code more easy to read, and that's really really important. Because you know
the compiler the interpreter really doesn't care you know whether you you know write it over one line
over two lines you know at the end of the day it's going to recombine lines into single lines as it
as needed.
It's going to tokenize everything, you know.
It doesn't care about human readability.
But as developers, we need to care about human readability, because we are reading our code.
Other people might be reading our code or - you might even be reading your code six months later and trying
to figure out: what was I doing?
So it's really important to make code readable. It's important to put comments, it's important to format things
nicely.
And this allows us to do that. So this conversion between physical and logical newlines, right,
this removal of physical newline characters, is done either implicitly or explicitly. Implicitly in
some cases and in other cases we have to do explicit line breaks.
So let's take a look at the implicit first.
So for implicit really we can use things like expressions which are like lists literals right that start
and end with square brackets [], tuples with the round parentheses (), dictionaries that use the curly braces {}
and sets that also use curly braces.
And as I said before, it kind of makes sense, because dictionaries and sets are very very tightly related.
And then also function arguments and parameters can also be split over multiple lines.
And they also support inline comments.
So let's take a look at how this works.
So for example for this list over here one two three,
you don't have to write it over a single line.
You could actually break it up over multiple lines.
And these physical newlines will be implicitly removed by Python.
Now in this case it doesn't make much sense to write this list this way but suppose that these were
like long strings then it would make more sense maybe to break it out over multiple lines so it's easier
to read.
Or maybe you have a nested structure where you have dictionaries that contain lists that contain dictionaries
that are very typical of you know things like JSON objects for example.
Then you probably will want to break that over multiple lines and do nice indenting so it's easy to
understand and read that particular object.
You can also include inline comments.
So at the end of every line after your you know before your physical newline character, you can insert
a comment that will be stripped out by Python.
So this is perfectly legal to do. Same thing with functions.
You don't have to write all your parameters over a single line, you may write over multiple lines.
And again it's for readability.
You can even comment, let's say, certain parameters if you want this way.
And then when you call the function, well, you can do the same thing, you can break up your arguments
over multiple lines.
You can even insert comments, right, within you know before you do your newline character.
So, remember that what happens at the end of the day, is that this comment is stripped out, and this new
line and this new line are stripped out, and you end up with def my_func(a, b, c) as if
you had written that.
OK that's how Python is going to basically combine these different physical lines into a single logical
line.
And the same thing happens here.
This comment here is going to get stripped out the newline character over here is going to get stripped
out.
And this is going to become my_func(10, 20, 30).
So, this is where implicit works.
Now there are sometimes cases where we have long statements, and we want to break those up over multiple
physical lines as well, but Python will not do implicit removal of your newline characters in that case.
You have to explicitly specify that.
I'm doing a continuation of the code. And you do that by using the continuation character, the backslash
character.
So multiple line statements are not implicitly converted, ok, into a single logical line.
Keep that in mind, so you have to use the backslash.
So for example if you want to break up an if statement that has multiple ands and ors and it gets really
complicated, you know, and it might make more sense to break it up over multiple lines in order to understand
what's happening what that piece of code is doing.
Again, readability - this won't work.
You cannot do that, right.
If a Python is going to look at this, it's going to put the new line token here, it's going to say well
this isn't valid doesn't work right because I didn't find the colon.
So instead what you can do is you can do an explicit line continuation, using this backslash character,
and this will work just fine.
Now the one thing is, you cannot put in comments after these you know backslashes, or even before them.
You have to put it - if you want to put a comment you're going to have to put it either above or below
or you can put it right after the colon as well, that's fine, but you cannot make a comment part of a
statement, you know being inside the statement.
Not even a multi-line statement.
So that won't work.
This for example is not legal, that won't work.
All right. The next thing we need to look at are multi-string literals. So we can also create strings
that span multiple lines in our physical you know code.
And we do that by using triple delimiters whether using single or double quote delimiters doesn't matter.
You just triple them up.
So instead of using a single single quote or a single double quote to delimit the string on either end
you used triple and that then allows you to write strings over multiple lines or multiple physical lines,
as in this example.
So we have a triple single quote.
This is, got a new line,
hit the enter key here, and a multi-line string continues,
and then we end the string. And you can do the same thing using double quotes.
So whatever you want to use. Now you have to really be aware that this works a little differently than
the implicit, for example, our continuation that we had with lists, where it was stripping out the newline
character. Here,
Python is not going to strip out the newline character.
So when you print the string out, it will retain this newline character.
In fact it will retain any character that you've typed into that string whether it be a new line, whether
it be a tab whether it be a Unicode character, you know some hidden you know characters that doesn't
print but it's still there.
Right.
So anything you type is going to be in that string including multiple spaces and things like that and
so it's important if you're trying to get a string that's formatted for display, you want to be sure
that you don't type extra characters that allows you to line things up in your code but then doesn't
line up when you print.
And we'll see examples of that throughout this course.
So these are just regular strings, so you can use escape characters if you want like backslash n and backslash t.
You can use string formatting, you know, you can apply the format method, you can do all that stuff.
They're just normal strings.
They are no different.
So multi-line string is just a regular string.
The only difference is that you can have that string, you know, content that literal span multiple lines.
Now one thing I want to point out is that multi-line strings are not the same thing as comments.
Now, they can be used as comments, especially with things where you know that we called docstring strings
that we'll look at in a lot more detail in the Object-Oriented section, but strings and comments are
not the same thing.
So yes, you can put strings inside your code that are not assigned to a variable, that are just sitting
there in your code, that's perfectly fine. And you can use that for docstrings, for documentation.
But these are not comments, they're not the same thing.
So when Python compiles your code, those strings will be part of your code. They'll be compiled and they
will be put into your compiled bytecode.
However comments are tossed out, they're not. So they're different things, not the same.
All right.
So let's switch to some code, and take a look at how all of this works.
So we're going to start of a list. Now a list can be written over one line.
Let's say something like that.
But sometimes you may want to write it over multiple lines, in which case we can do something like this.
And you don't have to put one item per line, you can put how many, you know, how many you want.
And we'll still get a regular list.
Nothing has changed, it's just implicit line continuation.
Now you can also add comments.
So let's say we say one and let's call it.
Item 1.
Now you have to be careful where you place the comma to separate your items, because if you put a comma
here, then this comma is part of the comment which means that it's not going to be a valid Python statement.
So if we do two here and we try and run this we get an invalid syntax error.
Well yeah, because there's no comma between the two, but there is a newline, right.
So instead what we'll have to do, to fix that, is one of two solutions. First one is to put the comma right
after the element but before the comment.
That's one way of doing it. The other way of doing it is just to put the comma before the next element.
And you can do that as well.
And in both cases it will do the same thing.
And if we look at the contents of a you'll notice it's just 1 comma 2, the comment was ignored.
OK.
Now this works the same way for you know tuples.
So a equals 1 comma 2 comma 3. We can put a comment.
here, we can put a comment here.
Put as many comments as we want.
And we just get a regular tupel, nothing different there.
Same thing with sets, which I won't show you, it's the same thing, and dictionaries as well. I will show
you that one very quickly.
So let's say we have a key value like this, so let's make it a value of 1.
We can add a comment right, so we can say this is our value for key one. And again, where we place the
comma is important, either here or at the beginning of the next item.
I'll put it at the beginning of the next item.
Key2 2 value for key two.
Now. We have to be careful here as well, because you'll notice that I have a comment on the last line,
which was at that closing brace over here is actually part of the comment.
So if I try and run that I'll get a syntax error, right.
So we have to fix that by putting it on its own line.
Right.
We have to do it that way.
And now that will work,  and we get a regular dictionary, ok. Now you can do the same thing when you
have a function.
So let's look def my_func().
We can certainly put a, b, c in this fashion.
But maybe I want to break it up, maybe I've got lots of parameters in the function or I got long names
or maybe there's some other reason why I want to break it up.
And in this case I'm going to break it up let's say this way.
Right.
So we've broken up the function this way.
And we can add a comment.
Right.
We can say: this is used to indicate blah blah blah.
You know and another comment here.
Right now again you've got to be careful about the placement of your commas.
Don't place them after the comments, otherwise they will be part of the comment and ignored, and you'll
have a syntax error.
OK so we can start with that.
And then we can just say you know print a, b, c.
So this function will just print whatever was passed in.
Now when we call the function we can do the same thing.
We can call function with let's say 10 20 30 OK that works just fine.
But we can also call it by splitting the values over multiple lines.
That's fine as well.
And again that's fairly useful when you're dealing with functions that take in a lot of parameters.
And maybe the parameter names are long maybe it's something that allows you to connect to a database
so you need to specify the database, you know, the solver the database maybe the table maybe the query
that you're trying to run.
So very often you know you end up writing function calls over multiple lines probably more often than
you do writing the function headers themselves.
So in this case we could do something like this.
my_func 10.
And, you know, comment here that describes maybe what the value is.
20 another comment, 30 and another comment.
And again, we have to be careful not to make that closing parentheses part of the comment itself.
And this works just as before.
Nothing different.
OK.
So that's kind of the line continuation the implicit line continuation.
Now let's take a look at explicit line continuation. So let's say we have a equals 10 b equals 20
c equals 30.
Let's say we have these three variables. And we write an IF statement. Then we say if a is greater than
5 and B is greater than 10 and C is greater than 20 which is going to be true in this particular case
then we can print: Yes.
OK.
So that works just fine.
Now sometimes your expressions here might become very long or there could be other statements too, it's not
just an if statement. But maybe the line just becomes too long, and it is preferred in Python to keep
your you know your line length under a certain number of characters to make it more readable on a variety
of screen resolutions and screen sizes.
So part of some of the best practices in Python which we'll talk about later.
Actually it's called a pep, pep 8, and we'll tell you take a look at that.
Well in an upcoming video.
So let's change this and let's put in line continuations. Let's say that I want to have each expression,
each subexpression, you know, those those comparisons, on different lines.
Then I can do a line continuation character essentially using a backslash, OK. And then we'll do another
one here and then we go over three lines.
Now the indentation actually doesn't matter at this point because remember, it doesn't matter how you
indent your code here because those new lines are going to get removed and it's going to become a single
line.
So in this case I'm going to choose to indent it maybe this way.
And that's perfectly fine too.
And as you can see it ran fine.
So the line continuation character is just something you can put in wherever you want to break a physical
line or a logical line into two physical lines, or more physical lines.
The next one are multiline strings.
Now multiline strings are done with triple delimiters.
So here I have three single quotes followed by three single quotes, that's the ending and closing quotes
and we can type something in there.
This is a string.
OK.
And if we print out a,
this is a string.
It's still a string.
So the triple delimiter just is a regular string.
But what's different about the triple delimiter is that we can split it over multiple lines as in this
case and you'll see the result is this backslash n, Right.
And this is why I just wanted to print it out this way, it's a string, so that newline character was
preserved.
So if we print it for display let's say from the program, we would actually get it over two lines.
Now what's important to realize is that anything you type in here.
So if we do something like this A equals tripple quote -
So now we have a multi line -
This is a string.
And let's say I put in a few extra spaces and maybe I'll put in an extra carriage return here.
I'll indent it some more.
This is a string that is created
over multiple lines.
So now if we look at a you'll notice that we have those carriage returns and those spaces are there
as well.
So if we print a.
Then we get exactly what we type over here.
So that's kind of important to remember because if you're trying to let's say define a multi-line string
to you know create some text that you want to display to a user let's say on the console, then if you're
trying to line things up so that the string looks good in your code it may actually not look good in
the actual console.
You know, for example if we do something like this A equals let's say some items, and I'm trying to, you
know, line it up here's my list so I go 1 item1 2 item2, ok.
It looks good in the code, but if you print it then it doesn't look that great, right.
It was indented over here.
A lot more than I had, right, because this seemed to line up with just one character difference, right
between this line and these items.
And this no longer does.
So just something to be aware of.
ok. In particular let's look at it this way.
So we have def my_func and so now we have indentation already, right.
We were using a equals, that's indented inside the function, and we do a multi-line string and say a multi-
line string.
I hit enter that is now the program automatically shifts
my, my you know, my line of code to the proper indentation and most of the Python IDEs will do that as
well.
So a multi-line string that is indented in the second line. And it will just this function will just
return that string.
OK.
So there we go.
Now if we print my_func call, then you'll notice what happened.
'that is indented in the second line' was actually indented. Because why?
Well this entire thing here is the string, which means it includes that indentation that was put in automatically
for us.
So in a case like this you've got to be careful. You have to really undent it if you want it to be not
indented in the display. So it looks weird. It looks like you're breaking you know the indentation, but
you're not. That's because remember that this is basically you know a line continuation, this is a single
entity, right here.
This is a single string literal. And so whatever's inside it doesn't matter if it's indented or not.
So in this case we do this and now we print it.
Now we get maybe something more like we would have expected.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.